Running dbs on k8s blog post (#1412)
questdb/questdb.io: blog/2023-03-02-dbs-on-k8s.mdx

out-of-the-box, it in fact only provides a set of cloud-native primitives (or
building blocks) for you to configure and use to deploy your workflows. Any
functionality outside of these core building blocks needs to be implemented
somehow in additional orchestration code (usually in the form of an operator) or
config.

### K8s Primitives

When working with databases, the obvious concern is data persistence. Earlier in
its history, k8s really shined in the area of orchestrating stateless workloads,
but support for stateful workflows was limited. Eventually, primitives like
[StatefulSets](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/statefulset/),
[PersistentVolumes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/)
(PVs), and PersistentVolumeClaims (PVCs) were developed to help orchestrate
stateful workloads on top of the existing platform.

![K8s Component Diagram](/img/blog/2023-03-02/db-on-k8s-diagram.png)

PersistentVolumes are abstractions that allow for the management of raw storage;
ranging from local disk to NFS, cloud-specific block storage, and more. These
work in concert with PersistentVolumeClaims that represent requests for a pod to

> access the storage managed by a PV. A user can bind a PVC to a PV to make an

Reviewer: Based on this text, should the diagram be updated? From "blinds" to "bound to"?
![Screenshot 2023-03-02 at 13 46 38](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/107401731/222446333-5e9c24e3-7795-4715-8732-43c4e4ae57a8.png)

Author: I don't think so, because all verbs are in present tense in the diagram

ownership claim on a set of raw disk resources encompassed by the PV. Then, you
can add that PVC to any pod spec as a volume, effectively allowing you to mount
any kind of persistent storage medium to a particular workload. The separation
of PV and PVC also allows you to fully control the lifecycle of your underlying
block storage, including mounting it to different workloads or freeing it
all together once the claim expires.

StatefulSets manage the lifecycles of pods that require more stability than

> exists in other primitives like Deployments and ReplicaSets. By creating a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
exist in other primitives like Deployments and ReplicaSets. By creating a
```

While hosting a database on k8s might be a fit for your organization, it just as
easily could create even more overhead and instability if not done carefully.
Implementing the Day 2 features that I described above is time-consuming and
costly to get right. Testing is incredibly important, since you want to be
absolutely sure that your (and your customers') precious data is kept safe and
accessible when it's needed.

If you just need a reliable database to run your application on top of, then
maybe all of the work required to run a database on k8s might be too much for
you to undertake. But if your database has strong k8s support (most likely via
an operator), or you are doing something unique (and at-scale) with your storage
layer, it might be worth it to look more into managing your stateful databases
on k8s. Just be prepared for a large time investment and ensure that you have
the requisite in-house knowledge (or support) so that you can be confident that
you're performing your database automation activities correctly and safely.

We've spent the past year building our own managed database service on top of
k8s. If you want to check out what we've built, you can visit

> [our cloud](https://questdb.io/cloud/) and see it for yourself!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[the QuestDB Cloud page](https://questdb.io/cloud/) and see it for yourself!
```

altogether once the claim expires.

StatefulSets manage the lifecycles of pods that require more stability than
exists in other primitives like Deployments and ReplicaSets. By creating a
StatefulSet, you can guarantee that when you remove a pod, the storage managed
by its mounted PVCs does not get deleted along with it. You can imagine how
useful this property is if you're hosting a database! StatefulSets also allow
for ordered deployment, scaling, and rolling updates, all of which create more
predictability (and thus stability) in our workloads, also something that seems
to go hand-in-hand with what you want out of your database's infrastructure.

### What else?

While StatefulSets, PVs and PVCs do quite a bit of work for us, there are still
many administration and configuration actions that you need to perform on a
production-level database. For example, how do you orchestrate backups and
restores? These can get quite complex when dealing with high-traffic databases
that include functionality such as WALs. What about clustering and high
availability? Or version upgrades? Are these operations zero-downtime? Every

> database deals with these features in a different way, many of which require

Reviewer: ```suggestion
database deals with these features in different ways, many of which require
```

there are several ways to build automation around your database on k8s.

#### Helm & Yaml tools won't get us there

Since k8s configuration is declarative, it can be very easy to get from 0 -> 1
with traditional yaml-based tooling like Helm or cdk8s. Many industry-leading
k8s tools install into a cluster with a simple `helm install` or `kubectl apply`
command.

These are sufficient for Day 1 Operations and non-scalable deployments. But as
soon as you start to move into more vendor-specific Day 2 Operations that
require more coordination across system components, the usefulness of
traditional yaml-based tools starts to degrade quickly, since some imperative
programming logic is required.

#### Provisioners

One pattern that you can use to automate database management is a provisioner
process. We've even used this approach to build v1 of our managed cloud
solution. When a user wants to make a change to an existing database's state,
our backend sends a message to a queue that is eventually picked up by a
provisioner. The provisioner reads the message, uses its contents to determine
which actions to perform on the cluster, and performs them sequentially. Where

> appropriate, each action contains a rollback step in case of an apply error to

Reviewer: Just to check it is an error in applying (something) instead of an 'applied error'?

Author: yep... maybe `kubectl apply` error...

```suggestion
appropriate, each action contains a rollback step in case of a `kubectl apply` error to
```
